---
layout: post
title:  'How RuboCop Led me to Implement the Null Object Pattern'
date:   2018-08-24
---

Last week, in an effort to level-up my knowledge of Ruby style conventions, I connected [Code Climate](https://codeclimate.com/) and installed the [RuboCop gem](https://github.com/rubocop-hq/rubocop) in a few of the older projects I've been refactoring. As I expected with a new install in existing apps, RuboCop presented me with a backlog of roughly 300 items to address in each app.

The most interesting suggestions were in a `SessionsController` because I got to learn about the [Safe Navigation Operator](http://mitrev.net/ruby/2015/11/13/the-operator-in-ruby/), or `&.`, which led to learning about using the [Null Object Pattern](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=29MAL8pJImQ&feature=youtu.be&t=10m30s).

In the `SessionsController` below, you'll see the first RuboCop suggestion (i.e. the tip of the iceberg):

```ruby
# app/controllers/sessions_controller.rb

class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  ...
  def create
    user = User.find_by(email: params[:email])

    # RUBOCOP says: Style/SafeNavigation: Use SafeNavigation
    if user && user.authenticate(params[:password])
      # [log the user in]
    else
      # [re-render the sign-in form and show an error message]
    end
  end
  ...
end
```

So what is this `Style/SafeNavigation` suggestion about? The Safe Navigation Operator returns `nil` if a method is called on a nil object instead of throwing an error.

In his post, [The Safe Navigation Operator (&.) in Ruby](http://mitrev.net/ruby/2015/11/13/the-operator-in-ruby/), [Georgi Mitrev](http://mitrev.net/about/) has a nice explanation of the case for it:

>Imagine you have an account that has an owner and you want to get the owner’s address. If you want to be safe and not risk a Nil error you would write something like the following:
```ruby
if account && account.owner && account.owner.address
  ...
end
```
We can rewrite the previous example using the safe navigation operator:
```ruby
if account&.owner&.address
  ...
end
```

Now that's some pretty nifty shorthand for an otherwise long string of `&&`s. So in my case, this is the style change RuboCop is suggesting:

```ruby
if user&.user.authenticate(params[:password])
  ...
end
```

Right? Not quite. When I implemented it, RuboCop said:

```
Lint/SafeNavigationChain: Do not chain ordinary method call after safe navigation operator.
```
Okay... thanks for the sweet tip on `&.`, but _what do you want from me, RuboCop???_

Better object-oriented programming, my friends. Better OOP. Are you [down with OOP](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idx3GSL2KWs)? lol.

# The Null Object Pattern Solution

In a pairing session, I was able to see the bigger situation here, which is that my code is asking an object about whether it exists when it could just be handing the `nil` value in a predicted way. What if `user.authenticate(params[:password])` could just safely run regardless of whether an instance of the `User` class exists?

That would be nice. And to make that dream a reality, we need a null user object. As Sandi Metz explains in her [Nothing is Something talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=29MAL8pJImQ&feature=youtu.be&t=10m30s), this object will stand in as a legitimate object where we'd otherwise have a `nil`. Since we will have built this custom object, we get to tell it how to react to situations that would otherwise result in a `nil` value and subsequent error.

Running this in the console, we get:
```
>> user = User.find_by(email: "email-that-doesn't-exist")

>> user
=> nil

>> user.authenticate(params[:password])
!! #<NoMethodError: undefined method `authenticate' for nil:NilClass>
```

### The Guaranteed User

The controller doesn't want to manage `nil` users. It's busy and has its own stuff to do. It wants a _guaranteed user_ to work with. The controller doesn't care by what means this guaranteed user happens, it just needs one in order to move forward.

Instead of creating a `user` variable with the potential of equaling `nil` because a matching record isn't found in the database, our `user` variable will equal some safe object provided to us by our new `GuaranteedUser` class. Then, since we don't have to safeguard against `nil`s, we can safely run the `user.authenticate` method.

```ruby
# app/controllers/sessions_controller.rb

class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  ...
  def create
    # Instead of a potentially nil instance of the User
    # class, we're guaranteeing an actual object which is
    # provided by the GuaranteedUser class
    user = GuaranteedUser.find_by(email: params[:email])

    # Now that we're not worried about managing nils, we can run
    # the authenticate method without other safeguards in place
    if user.authenticate(params[:password])
      # [log the user in]
    else
      # [re-render the sign-in form and show an error message]
    end
  end
  ...
end
```

#### If the user doesn't actually exist in the `users` table, how can we guarantee a user object?
We're not guaranteed to get a `User` object, but we're guaranteed to get a user-like object, and that's really all we need. The `GuaranteedUser` class searches the `users` table and if it finds a matching user, it returns that `User` object. If there is no user that matches, it returns a `NullUser` object. Either outcome supplies us with the user-like object that we need.

```ruby
# app/models/guaranteed_user.rb

class GuaranteedUser
  def self.find_by(params)
    User.find_by(params) || NullUser.new
  end
end


# app/models/null_user.rb

class NullUser
end
```

In the console, we try to find a user via its email address. When we cannot find a match, we get an object instead of a nil value:
```
>> user = GuaranteedUser.find_by(email: "email-that-doesn't-exist")

>> user
=> #<NullUser:0x00007f88130dbc70>
```

#### But how is `user.authenticate` safe to run now?
It's not yet, but after we create an `authenticate` method for `NullUser`, it will be. We'll make the method return `false` just like the `authenticate` method from the `User` class would if a user that actually existed didn't pass authentication. This method will always return false because a `NullUser` will never pass authentication.


```ruby
# app/models/null_user.rb

class NullUser
  def authenticate(_)
    false
  end
end
```

Running this in the console, we get:
```
>> user = GuaranteedUser.find_by(email: "email-that-doesn't-exist")

>> user
=> #<NullUser:0x0007fed23436d6>

>> user.authenticate(params[:password])
=> false
```

The generated `NullUser` object fails authentication, the sign-in form is re-rendered in the browser, and the human user sees an error about incorrect credentials.

In the case of a legitimate user (an email that does exist in the `users` table) that fails authentication because of the wrong password, in the console we get:

```
>> user2 = GuaranteedUser.find_by(email: 'sample@gmail.com')
=> #<User id: 2, name: "Actual User", email: "sample@gmail.com", created_at: "2016-01-26 18:05:14", updated_at: "2018-08-20 10:03:44">

>> user2.authenticate('wrong-password')
=> false
```

The `User` object fails authentication, the sign-in form is re-rendered in the browser, and the human user sees an error about incorrect credentials. The key point here is _regardless of whether the `user` variable is pointed to an instance of `User` or `NullUser`, the rest of the process flows in the same way._

This approach makes for a much cleaner controller. It also leaves decisions about what defines a `GuaranteedUser` and a `NullUser` up to their own classes to handle. Since we've wrapped the concept of a user-like object in a reliable API called `GuaranteedUser`, we can access it confidently throughout our codebase and limit the number of conditions we'd otherwise have to write.  

### Taking this beyond the SessionsController

I personally haven't implemented anything beyond what my needs were for this controller yet. However, have done so is making me think about other possible uses for this guaranteed user object. I can think of a couple of projects I've worked on where I needed a "guest" user to keep my views from blowing up when no logged-in user was present. Using this pattern, gets me a lot closer to what I wanted to have happen in my views:

```ruby
# app/models/null_user.rb

class NullUser
  ...
  def name
    'Guest'
  end
end
```

```erb
<!-- app/views/some_view.html.erb -->

<!-- I'd get to do this: -->
<h1>Hello, #{@user.name}!</h1>

<!-- Instead of this: -->
<% if @user %>
  <h1>Hello, #{@user.name}!</h1>
<% else %>
  <h1>Hello, Guest!</h1>
<% end %>

```

Though I still have to work out the rest of the details of making this happen, this Null Object Pattern concept feels like a solid foundation on which to work.

_______

#### Side Note:

A big chunk of those 300ish RuboCop suggestions belonged to the  `Style/FrozenStringLiteralComment` category, which is to prepare my Ruby 2.5.0 codebase for upcoming changes in Ruby 3.0. If you find yourself staring down the prospect of adding the [magic comment](https://idiosyncratic-ruby.com/58-magic-instructions.html) line:

```
# frozen_string_literal: true
```
to the top of almost all of the files in your Rails app like I did, don't worry, [there's a gem for that](https://github.com/Invoca/magic_frozen_string_literal).
